{\rtf1\mac\ansicpg10000\cocoartf824\cocoasubrtf420
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset77 TimesNewRomanPS-BoldMT;\f1\froman\fcharset77 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f2\froman\fcharset77 TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc2\leveljcn2\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid0\'02\'05.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}}{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc2\leveljcn2\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid0\'02\'05.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}}{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc2\leveljcn2\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid0\'02\'05.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}}{\listname ;}\listid3}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}}
{\info
{\title What research will you do when you get there/in the next 5 years?}
{\author Ian Underwood}
{\*\company  }}\margl1440\margr1440\margb1728\margt1728\vieww9200\viewh8100\viewkind1\viewscale150
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1

\f0\b\fs20 \cf0 \ul \ulc0 JOB QUEST IN ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION
\f1\b0 \ulnone \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 This packet was compiled by Anurag Agrawal.  Jennifer Thaler, Nora Underwood, and Helen Rodd donated their compiled packets, with the comments and input from Rick Karban, John Thompson, Dan Doak, Peter Kareiva, Spencer Barrett, Chris Eckert, Locke Rowe, Margaret Ptacek, Judy Stamps, Joe Travis, Sharon Strauss, and many others.  The contents are completely skewed towards the quest of obtaining an academic position at a research university and are probably incomplete and inaccurate if you are seeking other types of positions.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1

\f0\b \cf0 \ul \ulc0 Graduate school advice that will help you get there\
\
\pard\tx360\pardeftab720\li360\fi-360\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \cf0 \ulnone Be persistent with your research.  Many of your papers will get rejected (some may get rejected several times).  Don\'d5t let this discourage you, it happens to most everyone.  Take the reviewers\'d5 comments for what they are worth, some will be serious comments, some will be misinformed, and some will simply be the reviewers being impatient jerks.  A rejection from a journal is not a reflection on you or the science.  Be persistent.  If you think you can adequately address the criticisms raised by the reviewers, it is okay to call or e-mail the editor (be nice) and ask if s/he\'d5d consider another look (explain your issues).
\f0\b \ul \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \ulnone Sell yourself high.  This means sending your work to the best journals.  This also means a higher probability of rejection.  However, the best journals will never publish your work unless you send it to them.  Model your papers after papers on similar topics in those journals.
\f0\b \ul \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \ulnone Give talks-- two a year and at least one at national/international meetings once you have data.
\f0\b \ul \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \ulnone Invite seminar speakers!  Think of heros and potential post-doc advisors and invite them.
\f0\b \ul \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \ulnone Learn the academic industry: how to review papers, grants, etc. ask your major professor about this and have him/her to let you in on reviews etc.
\f0\b \ul \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \ulnone Do collaborative projects with students and faculty who aren\'d5t in your lab.
\f0\b \ul \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \ulnone Do side projects not directly linked to your thesis which expand your breadth, but don\'d5t spread yourself too thin.
\f0\b \ul \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \ulnone The most important thing you will take with you to a job interview is a solid 45 minute talk that is a cohesive, complete story.  Thus, above all else, some of your research projects must converge on a story that does not require jumping around or switching gears!
\f0\b \ul \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \ulnone Publish in the general journals but also in the specialized journals corresponding to what you want to be: entomology journals if you want to be an entomologist, conservation journals if you want a conservation biology position.  Try to have a mix of thick papers (long and dense, few people may ever read these, but they are critical to show you can do solid work) and slim papers (papers that will actually get read, have some flashiness, but may not be as overwhelmingly solid).
\f0\b \ul \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \ulnone Write a review/synthesis paper\'d1these are hard to get published as graduate students because nobody knows you, but you often will have all the current papers in an emerging area because of your dissertation project--- put them together and synthesize.
\f0\b \ul \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \ulnone Use the \'d2scan-doc\'d3 or \'d2weekly update\'d3 function from the library to keep up on the literature in your field.  This will send you the latest articles based on your search criteria (author name, key word, title word, etc) every week (including abstracts).  In addition, sign of up for the free table-of-contents alerts from the major journals in your field\'c9 this will help you stay on top of the literature,
\f0\b \ul \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \ulnone Pay membership dues and subscribe to the hard copy for one of the major society journals (Ecology, Am Nat, Evolution) \'c9 carry around the paper copy in your backpack until you\'d5ve at least read most of the abstracts.  The guilt of getting the paper copy in your mailbox is a good thing.
\f0\b \ul \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \ulnone Do something so that you can say you taught your own course\'d1even if the pay is non-existent.  Look into doing a hybrid seminar course where you give 10 lectures and have 20 hours of discussion (or whatever)--- this will be a lot less work than a real lecture course, but is more than a seminar--- you will get credit later on in the process for teaching a course yourself.
\f0\b \ul \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \ulnone Publish soon.  Try and have a good paper submitted every year starting as early as you can, but not later than your third year.
\f0\b \ul \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \ulnone Move institutions between degrees and travel while at your current place.  Different supervisors, graduate programs, departments, etc. all offer slightly different perspectives.  It is important for scientists to interact with different groups and to reinvent themselves in different environments to stay sharp. It will also be handy to have referees from different institutions.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1

\f2\i \cf0 \
Recommended stuff
\f1\i0 :\
\
Peters, Robert L. Getting what you came for: the smart student's guide to earning a Master's or a Ph.D. New York: \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 Noonday Press, 1997. \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 Mack, R. N. 1986. Writing with precision, clarity, and economy.  Bulletin of the Ecological Society of America 67: \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 31-35.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 Various graduate school advice compiled: {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.dartmouth.edu/~mpayres/teach/suggestions.htm"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs24 \cf2 \ul \ulc2 http://www.dartmouth.edu/~mpayres/teach/suggestions.htm}}\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1

\f0\b \cf0 \ul \ulc0 \uc0\u8232 \
\page Writing a CV\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri0\sl360\slmult1

\f1\b0 \cf0 \ulnone Keep it short, concise, without jargon, with the important stuff up first, memorable, and like a list of sound-bites.  Do not include the small insignificant stuff like published abstracts.  Meeting presentations (especially invited talks) are OK, but put this towards the end, after the important stuff like your publications.  Padding only loses people, it does not help.  Make it readable by including headings in bold and extra spaces and gutters.\
The first page should include the standard stuff on addresses, education, etc.  The three things that really matter go next: publications, grants, and real teaching experience.  Separate the real publications from non-refereed stuff (perhaps have three categories: 1) papers- including things in press, 2) book chapters and non-refereed stuff, and 3) submitted papers).  Don\'d5t include too much (if any) \'d2in prep\'d3 stuff\'d1we all know that these can be a big fantasy (if this is your first CV, you may want to include a couple of in prep items\'c9 in this case give a realistic date of submission and target journal).  Include that you have been a TA, but emphasize any real teaching experience.  Make sure the real stuff sticks out\'c9 if you want to include stuff on society memberships, service, etc. put it at the very end of the CV.\
Include grants that you wrote that you weren\'d5t a PI on (if this is the case, be sure one of your letter writers puts the fact that you wrote XX% of the grant and that it is your work.  This will impress people, it will give credit where it is due, and also it will verify that you deserve to put the grant on your cv).  Give dollar amounts for all the grants.\
Possible organization: 1) education, 2) positions, 3) publications, 4) grants (list small ones too, but highlight or separate big ones), 5) teaching, 6) awards, 7) talks, 8) reviewers for\'c9, 9) other small stuff.    \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1

\f0\b \cf0 \ul \ulc0 When to think about applying\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1

\f1\b0 \cf0 \ulnone \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 Start thinking about it a full year before you graduate.  It is probably a good idea to start going through the process even if you definitely want to do a post-doc.  You only need a couple of papers out, and a couple in the pipeline to get a job.  The general timeline is: 1) Job advertisements go out from August through December (most of them in September, October and November), application deadlines are from early September through March (most of them by February 1\super st\nosupersub ), interviews are from October through April (most of them November though March).\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri0\sl360\slmult1

\f2\i \cf0 Things to get you going
\f1\i0 : Start working on your CV, statements of research and teaching, and buy some nice clothes. Sign up for the Science Magazine e-mail list at the web site: www.sciencemag.org.  Go to the "careers" link, then to the "job alert" link.... input all of your information... email address, what sort of positions, include botany, entomology, ecology, evolution, or whatever (this may all be under life sciences).  Anyway, when you are done with this you will get a list e-mailed to you every week... you can then go to the specific sites for more details if the jobs sounds good for you.  Nature has a similar site (www.nature.com).\
In a good year there may be up to 50 jobs in ecology/evolution (in a bad year there may be 10-20 jobs).  Due to a wave of retirements, the prognosis is good for the next 5-10 years.  A lot of entomology jobs or jobs in other potentially more specialized fields are often not advertised in the weekly science journals\'c9 look for these in society bulletins and on department bulletin boards.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1

\f0\b \cf0 \ul \ulc0 \
The application process
\f1\b0 \ulnone  \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 It takes a lot of time to apply for jobs.  Do not expect to get almost anything else done during the months that you are getting your stuff together and sending it in\'d1if you get interviews, don\'d5t expect do anything else then either!  It is worth applying for jobs if they are close to your research area, even if you don\'d5t really fit\'c9(as long as it is a job that you feel you may end up wanting to take). At UC Davis, an ecologist that had done one project involving insects was hired for a mosquito position in the entomology department--- At Berkeley, an ecologist who studies host-parasite theory and empirical examples was hired for a vertebrate ecologist position.  I (Anurag) interviewed for a conservation biology position.  Once you get an interview\'d1you have the potential to be on an even playing field and the department might not know what they really want when they advertise.  If you do not exactly fit the description, you may have to convince some people about why you do fit\'d1or how you intend to fit.  They probably will ask you this point-blank.\
There will be 50-250 applicants for the jobs you apply for.  It is surprising, in that some of the bigger more well-known universities will get few applications and smaller ones will get more depending on how the ad is written.
\f0\b \ul  \

\f1\b0 \ulnone You\'d5ve got to be concise and highlight your strengths.  Your statements should be no longer than 2-3 pages each. If you have papers out, send reprints with all of your applications, whether they ask for them or not.  Tailor your statements and letter to the particular job\'c9 (but don\'d5t sell yourself as somebody your not).\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri0\sl360\slmult1

\f2\i \cf0 Cover letter
\f1\i0 : Keep it short (under a page)\'d1 make it easy for them to put a label on you.  Highlight your major achievements (grants from NSF or other major agency, major publication in\'c9). Say why you fit in, what you are excited about, where you are going, etc. This will rarely get read or scrutinized, so keep it short and memorable.\
\

\f2\i Statements
\f1\i0 : Don\'d5t be bland, don\'d5t be long winded, emphasize the future, sound excited, sound broad, but not too broad, make sure they know you have been doing some really meaty stuff in at least one area. Play your strengths, and don\'d5t try to be somebody you are not (if they like you and you don\'d5t fit the job description you may still get an interview). Use phrases such as \'d2I plan to\'d3 \'d0 not \'d2I hope\'d3 \'c9 use \'d2in my laboratory I will\'d3\'c9 Statements should not be longer than 2-3 pages.  If you are just starting out, it is very important to have a vision of NEW work you plan to do.  Hiring committees often worry about people fresh out of a PhD, and having a clear vision of new work will put these fears to rest.  Perhaps use some text from a post-doc proposal you have been writing\'c9 something that addresses a big question in an area extending from your current work.  Testing the \'d4same\'d5 (thesis) hypothesis in a new system or continuing to work on the same problem are not as compelling as developing some new area of research (this is especially true for people who are fresh out) \'d0 the committee will want to see evidence for innovation well-beyond your thesis.\
\

\f2\i Letters of reference
\f1\i0 :
\f2\i  
\f1\i0 You need 3 for most jobs and 4 for some.  It is usually OK to send 4 even if 3 are requested.  These are pretty important and should be strong letters from people that you know well.  It helps if the people reading the letters know the people writing them.  Since your letter writers will be writing many many letters for you, it is nice to give them a sheet with the addresses of the places you are applying and also attach the job ad.  Since the season lasts a couple of months, you could give your letter writers such a sheet every couple weeks.  Give your letter writers enough time to write the letters\'d1some people will tailor each letter to each job\'d1others will not. Strong letters from well-respected scientists can be very important.  Cultivate these relationships throughout your graduate career.  If there are certain things you want (or do not want) a letter writer to emphasize this is OK talk about (your ghost-writing of major grants, your academic spouse, etc.)\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1

\f0\b \cf0 \ul \ulc0 \
The structure of the interview
\f1\b0 \ulnone  \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi360\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 You will get a call, usually from the search chair.  They will want you to come in about 2 weeks time.  The interviews are usually 1 \uc0\u189  to 2 days.  Don\'d5t do a horrendous flight\'c9 if you or they are making the arrangements, don\'d5t be too shy about saying that a flight with 3 connections is not for you\'c9 Some universities will pay $2000 to fly you out, others will ask you to stay a Saturday night to get the $500 fare down to $450.  It is okay to say you want the better flight.  You will have almost all of your meals with people (faculty).  Students will take you to lunch or have it with you in a conference room on the second day.  Your talk will probably be on day 1, at 4pm.  You will meet with a dean at some point.  You may have some, all, or no group interviews--- although you will probably at least meet once with the entire search committee.  After dinner at a restaurant on the first day, there will often be an open-house at one of the search committee member\'d5s houses.  In all you will essentially have \u189  - 1 hour meetings continuously from 8:00 in the morning to 8:00 in the evening for the two days. It\'d5s an endurance test.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1

\f0\b \cf0 \ul \ulc0 General interview advice\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1\qj

\f1\b0 \cf0 \ulnone \
\pard\tx360\pardeftab720\li360\fi-360\ri0\sl360\slmult1\qj
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 Before you go\'d1talk to people at your home university and other folks about the place you are visiting, who they know there, etc.  This will help a lot and give you a feel for the place.  If you know graduate students, post-docs, or even faculty there\'d1call them up, email them, whatever- it is not inappropriate.\
Read a few abstracts of the people\'d5s work.  Nobody is going to grill you on it but it makes it easier to have a conversation.  You can keep these in the folder you will be carrying around with you (to glance at between meetings).  Know the people\'d5s area who you will talk to and sound interested!  It is amazing how few job applicants do this!\
Most of the time will be spent in idle chit chat.  You have to aggressively sell yourself, because only a few people will actually ask you the important questions.  Avoid conversations that do not leave an impression.\
You must have a future directions spiel practiced.  This is the only question that I was asked at all of the schools.  Be sure some of this is new and, at some level, a departure from what you are currently doing.\
Act like the normal person that you are.  They are looking for a colleague whom they can talk to.\
Have a list of questions and ask them of everybody who is appropriate.  Don\'d5t worry about asking the same question several times \'d0 YOU HAVE TO DO THIS!, it\'d5s better than silence and people may give you different answers (it\'d5s fun to hear the different answers).  BE PREPARED TO REPEAT YOURSELF CONSTANTLY!  This was one of the most challenging aspects for me\'d1be ready to repeat yourself.\
Don\'d5t talk about salary or figures for startup.  You should have a list of a few big items that you will need (growth chambers, scopes, molecular equipment) to give them an idea of the type of lab that you will set up (only if they ask).  If they bring up figures just nod and say you\'d5d like to talk about that stuff when you have an offer.\
Act like you care about teaching, even if you haven\'d5t done much.  In most departments, some people will be looking at you from the perspective of how good a teacher you are.\
Remember that you are on the interview because you love doing science.\
There are often a few departmentally recognized jerks, don\'d5t worry about them.  Just keep your cool, they come across as the idiot, not you.  The most important thing here is to not get riled up by their questions: \'d2I have heard nothing new from you\'d1you evolutionary biologists have been saying the same thing for the past 30 years; where is the beef?\'d3 \'d0 I got this from two department chairs, one at Berkeley and one at Chicago.  \
Ask for bathroom breaks when you need them.  Or if you are left to yourself for a few minutes, take them yourself\'c9. Nobody will be wondering where you are.  Use this as a time to look at your notes of questions to ask, thing to bring up, etc.  Also sip some water and relax for a few minutes!\
Have child-like enthusiasm\'c9 say you like the town, and have been liking what you have been seeing.\
Say your \'d2thank you\'d3s for getting picked up, taken out to dinner etc.\
Give search chair an updated CV if you have had papers accepted, grants funded, etc.\
The correct answer is usually YES:  when asked if you want to go out for a beer, stop by the house and meet their family, etc. etc\'c9 Obviously don\'d5t compromise your principles, but if you say no, people will remind you that you said no for your whole interview.\
Give your talk in 45 minutes--- allow lots of time for questions--- nobody ever complains about a talk being too short unless it is thin or less then 35 minutes.\
Remember that you are interviewing them too--- this means you should ask about things that are important to you and also that you should have an opinion about things and not just seem like a yes-person.\
Carry some Tylenol or Advil and a hanky\'d1it can be really useful at 3pm if you\'d5ve got a headache.  \
If you tend to get hungry, carry a snack!  You may find it hard to eat during lunch if people are firing questions on you\'c9 and this is not a time to get it all over the place. \
Do not negotiate anything on the interview--- you can observe, take notes of what you like and don\'d5t like, but save the negotiating.  Sometimes people will try and bait you\'d1don\'d5t take the bait.\
Go in with some sort of course outline, even if it is only in your head.  Be sure to have ideas about potential labs that you could run, and how and why they would work and teach the students.\
Have an idea about a philosophy of teaching (i.e., wanting the students to learn, not regurgitate, and how you do that, etc., how you feel about mentoring graduate students, field or lab courses, etc.).\
Think about local projects and learn a little bit about the local biota.  Some people on the faculty will be looking for somebody that won\'d5t spend all of their time away.\
Ask to see the space that you would occupy.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1\qj
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1\qj

\f0\b \cf0 \ul \ulc0 Specific advice\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri0\sl360\slmult1\qj

\f2\i\b0 \cf0 \ulnone \
What to wear and bring: 
\f1\i0 You\'d5ve got to be comfortable, but dress well.  Formal suits are overkill and may be perceived as weird.  A tie is optional for men, but is recommended in the southern US or at other more formal d places/departments.  Have nice comfortable shoes, they don\'d5t have to be fancy.  It is good to stand out a bit when you are walking in the halls on your interview. Dress cleanly and simple, blue and white shirts, simple navy jackets, etc. work well.  You must bring a folder to keep your schedule and some notes.  A good thing to keep in the folder is a copy of questions you would like to ask\'d1refresh you memory on breaks and free time.  This will also give you a place to stuff reprints that people you interview will give you (because you are interested in their work).\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri0\sl360\slmult1

\f2\i \cf0 Talking to the dean: 
\f1\i0 The deans have to meet with you (usually it is a small dean, or dean-let).  They often don\'d5t know what to say to you, and make small talk. They don\'d5t get a vote (occasionally they get a veto, though).  Be prepared to have stuff to say, but also take a break when you are with the deans. You can talk about big stuff\'d1wanting to work on training grants, where s/he sees the department is going, new positions, the tenure process, etc.  No need to pay attention to the stuff about retirement plans.  This meeting is potentially very important if you are interested in negotiating something big\'d1like a spousal position\'c9 the dean can make it happen.  Don\'d5t bring it up at this point, just make a great and lasting impression.  Definitely don\'d5t talk about dollar amounts for start-up, salary, etc.  If the dean is a scientist, asking about their current or former research is OK.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri0\sl360\slmult1

\f2\i \cf0 Talking to graduate students
\f1\i0 : This does really count.  Ask them what they do-- they will probably go around the room.  Ask them questions about their projects, or refer to how your work, or work you are familiar with fits in.  Ask them what they want, what is missing in the department.  Feel free to joke a bit with the students, they will love it if they can identify with you.  Talk about professional development for graduate students, and how you would like to run seminars or workshops on this--- as a young person, that is something you can bring to the department that is often missing, and it is something that graduate students often like and need.  As it is generally the case that the graduate students are the movers and shakers of a department, how good they are and how enthusiastic they are is likely to be a good indicator of the health of the department.  Do not take the meeting with the student\'d5s lightly, they may have a vote, and they will certainly have a voice.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri0\sl360\slmult1

\f2\i \cf0 Your talk: 
\f1\i0 It will often be at the dead time of the day: 4pm.  Ask for a glass of water before hand.  If you don\'d5t like laser pointers, don\'d5t use one.  Say thanks for the invitation and tell them that you have been having a great time.  Know your talk by heart, and don\'d5t use notes.  State the broad interesting issues and questions.  Be sure to also state your specific question very clearly.  Have an outline so everybody knows where you are going.  Don\'d5t switch gears\'d1weave a complete story that is all tied together.  Drop hints regarding the statistics used, but don\'d5t give too many details.  End with a punchy statement with the punch-line\'d1not with caveats, or what you wish you could have done. The introduction can be 10-15 minutes. Many of the research talks you give will be used to determine your teaching ability.  The best talks are 45 minutes.  Remember to know your audience:  Are you talking to a biology department, an evolution and ecology audience?  Be broad, avoid jargon and explain things that you may think everybody should know (e.g., trophic cascades)\'c9 make it accessible to all biologists. \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri0\sl360\slmult1

\f2\i \cf0 Teaching talks: 
\f1\i0 Many places will have you give a teaching talk\'d1they may give you a topic or let you choose one from a list.  Some will want a sample lecture\'d1others may actually want a verbal statement of your teaching philosophy.  In general, ask those around you that actually teach those subjects for outlines or notes.  It is usually fine to have notes for your teaching talk.  They will probably ask you to not use slides, but overheads and handouts may be very useful.  The faculty may interrupt you during your talk and pretend to be students asking questions.  Try not to get flustered by them, but rather have fun with them.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri0\sl360\slmult1

\f2\i \cf0 Talking to the department chair: 
\f1\i0 This is somebody that has to believe you are a viable candidate, your research is fundable, and that you are a mature person going to contribute to the department.  Don\'d5t talk about dollar amounts for start-up, salary, etc., but do bring up what you think may be big needs (you plan to do a lot of sequencing, and everybody knows that is expensive).  Think big when you talk to the chair, think about training grants, and graduate education, etc.  The chair may or may not have a vote on the search committee (although s/he probably has veto power) \'c9  if you have something personal you would like to talk about with somebody at the University, the chairperson is probably the right person (this may be a risk, but this is the right person \'d0 see dual career advice below).  Again, leaving a good impression about your intense curiosity as a scientist is very important foe the chair, and also seeming like you will be a big contributor (training, funding, participating).\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0

\f0\b \cf0 \ul \ulc0 \page Questions you WILL be asked: prepare answers!\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\qc

\f1\b0 \cf0 \ulnone \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0
\cf0 \
What research will you do when you get here/in the next 5 years?\
\
Will your field work be in this area?  The answer does not have to yes, although an interest in some local system us nice.\
\
What courses would you want to teach?\
\
What is your philosophy of undergraduate teaching?\
\
How do you feel about involving undergraduates in your research?\
\
What is your philosophy of graduate student training?  What will your graduate students work on?\
\
How many students do you expect to have?\
\
How will you support graduate students?\
\
What external funding will you pursue?\
\
What research have you done?\
\
How does your work fit into the big picture? What major questions does it address?\
\
Where will your work be going over the next 20 years?\
\
What will you contribute to the department?\
\
What do you see as your weaknesses?\
\
What do you see as department weaknesses?\
\
What space/equipment will you need?\
\
Why would you want to join this department?\
\
What\'d5s the best idea you ever had?\
\
What\'d5s the most important question in your field?\
\
Who are three people (or three papers) that have had a big influence on you, and why?\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0

\f0\b \cf0 \ul \ulc0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0

\f1\b0 \cf0 \ulnone Why should we hire you when you are so similar to X (A current member of the department)\
\
Do you think you would fit in here?
\f0\b \ul \page Questions to ask them\ulnone  (repeat yourself, repeat yourself, repeat yourself\'c9 keep asking people questions)\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\qc

\f1\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 1	What is the teaching load for this position? Is scheduling flexible, so I might accommodate intense field\
\pard\pardeftab720\li720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 seasons? [Don\'d5t ask this first, or make it seem like it is really important for you to get out of teaching.]\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 2	Are there specific courses the department wants you to teach?\
3	What\'d5s the usual class size? Is there TA support for larger classes?  Is there any TA training?\
\pard\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 4	Are there opportunities to develop specialized/smaller classes? Is there funding for course extras like field trips?  Give an example of an \'d2extra\'d3 you might want to do.\
5	What are the requirements for tenure? What\'d5s the normal schedule for tenure? [some people say this is a risky question to ask faculty because it makes you seem worried--- asking the dean is okay]\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 6	Is it possible to stop the clock for family leave? [some people say this is a risky question]\
7	Is there office space for graduate students outside of  my lab?\
8	What are local field sites? Agricultural/common garden sites?\
9	Is there intramural funding available?\
10	What types of grants do most faculty have?\
11	What are sabbatical schedules?\
12	What\'d5s the departmental philosophy about teaching vs. research, graduate versus undergraduate teaching?\
13	How are most graduate students supported? Is this support adequate?\
14	what are graduate student teaching loads? Do they have time for their research? How are TA\'d5s assigned?\
15	Where do graduates and undergraduates come from (geographically, how good are they)?\
16	What\'d5s the mix of masters vs. doctoral students?\
17	Do faculty get along? Is there interaction among different disciplines?\
\pard\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 18	Is any new hiring planned in the next 5 years?  This is a really good predictor of departmental health.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 19	What seminar series/discussion groups are there?\
20	Is there money to bring in outside speakers, for instance if I wanted to develop a focused seminar?\
21	Is the library adequate?\
22	What are frustrations of graduate students, of faculty?\
23	What\'d5s the cost of living?\
24	Is the chair a rotating position or permanent?\
25	When do startup funds expire? Is their use restricted?\
26	How are graduate students recruited? If I wanted to accept several in one year, could I?\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0
\cf0 \
\
\
\
\page \pard\pardeftab720\ri0

\f0\b \cf0 \ul \ulc0 Dual career couples advice\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0

\f1\b0 \cf0 \ulnone \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 It is possible! If you are both ecology evolution types you should both apply for all the positions so that the department has both files\'d1this applies even if the job isn\'d5t right for the one person.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0
\cf0 \
At the start you have several options:\
\
\pard\tx360\pardeftab720\li360\fi-360\ri0
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 send a joint cover letter and indicate what you want\
send independent cover letters and say what would be ideal\
send independent cover letters and indicate the situation\
send independent cover letters and don\'d5t mention anything\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0
\cf0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi360\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 The trade-offs are giving the prospective university enough time to come up with an additional position versus losing an interview offer because they don\'d5t want to deal with it.  Jennifer and I did #4.  Although giving the university enough time to work on something is good, we found that indicating your intentions at this early stage is meaningless because they have not looked at you or any of the other candidates\'d1all it can do is bias them.  Also, by submitting independent packages, it gives them a chance to fairly evaluate each person independently.  If you are looking for a shared/split position, in particular, then the cover letter is probably a good time to let them know because getting \'d2two for one\'d3 may play in your favor.  Generally search committee chairs do not know what to do with information about dual career couples (this is changing some), but the department chair is really the right person to talk to\'d1and often s/he will not even tell the search committee.\
After you get a call from the search committee, you have two options.  Bring up your spousal issue then or later at the interview.  Only if you are in a pretty good position (you have other offers, etc., and don\'d5t want to waste your own or their time) should you bring it up on the phone (otherwise see below *).  Talk to the search chair or call the department chair, depending on how you feel...inevitably, you or the search chair will have to talk to the department chair\'c9 and it might as well be you, since the search committee chair will be talking to the department chair anyway.  You will get one of several types of responses (surprisingly, nobody will flinch) ranging from \'d2we have a bad history with this and probably cannot do anything for you\'d3 to \'d2this is a real possibility, let\'d5s work on it.\'d3  It is imperative that they have your spouse\'d5s package at this stage.  You do not need to actually be married.  Try to be open and honest without making yourself vulnerable.  Tell them you are not interested in playing games or playing universities off of each other, just that you want you and your spouse to be happy and productive.  If you are flexible about the final situation, don\'d5t give them your ultimate bottom line, but rather, when pushed, say that what you are looking for is a situation where both of you can be productive and happy.\
At this stage they may want just you to visit or both of you to come out together or separately (separately is generally better because one is not in the shadow of the other).  If time is an issue because you have other things lined up, or if they are serious about you or you are serious about them, you should suggest that they invite your spouse out for a seminar in the next couple of weeks\'d1this will serve as a formal interview although they will not call it that.  They will pay for it, see your spouse, and have all of the cards when they make the decision.\
*If you would rather not bring it up on the phone (or you are not in a particularly strong position) you may want  to wait until the real interview\'c9 in this case only tell the department chair.  This will let you hit them with the news as they are seeing how great you are.   Inevitably, on your interview, people will ask you about your personal life.  It is not legal to do so, but it happened to me on almost all of my interviews.  It is okay to refuse to answer (none of their business)\'d1but this is hard in social circumstances.  Do whatever you feel comfortable\'d1it is okay to tell them, and it probably won\'d5t hurt you (you will be talking to the department chair anyway) \'d0 but you will feel violated!\
Once you have the offers, you hold all the cards, and you should try to negotiate all that you can\'c9 in some cases, the thing you negotiated was the two positions, and thus you won\'d5t be able to get more--- on the other hand, if they are investing in two people they probably want (and need) to set you up\'d1so let the negotiating begin. \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi360\ri0\sl360\slmult1

\f2\i \cf0 \
Random stuff
\f1\i0 : Some people say it is easier to get two jobs from two jobs than two jobs from one job\'c9. If that is the case, it may be worth going for something not quite ideal with the possibility of moving in a few years.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1

\f2\i \cf0 \
Some dual career resources:\
 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1

\f1\i0 \cf0 Talk to as many people as you can who have done it!\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.physics.wm.edu/dualcareer.html"}}{\fldrslt \cf2 \ul \ulc2 http://www.physics.wm.edu/dualcareer.html}}\
\pard\pardeftab720\li504\fi-504\ri0
\cf0 Agrawal, A.A. and J.S. Thaler. (2003). Solving the two-body problem. 
\f0\b Science Magazine\'d5s Next Wave
\f1\b0  ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://nextwave.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/2003/03/06/2"}}{\fldrslt \cf2 \ul \ulc2 http://nextwave.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/2003/03/06/2}}) -- there are other interesting perspective articles at this web site as well.\
\pard\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 Lubchenco, J., and B. A. Menge. 1993. Split positions can provide a sane career track - a personal account. BioScience 43:243-248.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl360\slmult1

\f0\b \cf0 \ul \ulc0 \
\
\page Negotiating\
\pard\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\ri0\sl360\slmult1

\f1\b0 \cf0 \ulnone \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 Once you get the offer, you hold all of the cards.  Talk to lots of experienced people about negotiating\'d1almost everybody feels like they could have done a better job.  Do not agree to stuff you are not prepared to agree to at first.  It is always okay to say, you will need to think about that.  Or let me get back to you on that.  Once you agree to anything it is hard to take it back\'c9 There may be several phone calls, several paid re-visits, and several versions of the written offer before you sign.  Get things that are important to you in writing.  Ask for things you need- don\'d5t be embarrassed.  If you don\'d5t ask you won\'d5t get it, and you definitely won\'d5t get it later.  It is important to figure out if somethings are non-negotiable because the department\'d5s hands are tied.  On the one hand, everything is negotiable, on the other hand, if the department\'d5s building is small and full, and everybody essentially has the same amount of space, chances are that you will not be able to negotiate more space.  There are two important aspects to this recognition: first, picking your battles in terms of things that you really want and can get, and 2\super nd\nosupersub , not pissing off the rest of the faculty or chair.  You will get a sense of what is possible and what is impossible, push hard, but not too hard.\
\pard\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri0\sl360\slmult1

\f2\i \cf0 Things you can ask for
\f1\i0 : More time to make your decision, no teaching first year, stay an extra year at your post doc (or have a short post-doc), good start-up funds, no sun-set on your start-up funds, good lab and greenhouse space (renovations), moving expenses, support for technician and students, 2 years of post-doc salary, summer salary for you for a couple of years, key big pieces of equipment (i.e., ask for a sequencer as a shared core facility that won\'d5t come out of your startup), etc.  Think big in terms of what is good for you and good for the department\'c9 these shared/core items can be huge!  \
}